Add dgram API discussion (#18210)
openssl/openssl: doc/designs/quic-design/dgram-api.md

Datagram BIO API revisions for sendmmsg/recvmmsg
================================================

We need to evolve the API surface of BIO which is relevant to BIO_dgram (and the
eventual BIO_dgram_mem) to support APIs which allow multiple datagrams to be

> sent or received simultaneously, such as sendmmsg(2)/recvmmsg(2).

Author: Supporting iovec creates an issue when trying to implement it on OSes that don't support it. At that point one's only option is to copy into a staging buffer (since this is UDP, and unlike TCP multiple sequential send() calls don't  have the same semantics as one call).

Such copying would give these functions a very surprising performance profile to applications that use them, where they are fast on some systems and slow on another. Rather than do this, we expose an API which we can support performantly on all platforms.

The primary use case for this API is for our QUIC implementation. The basic view is that lack of iovec here is not actually going to be a performance issue because the only things sent and received using this API by QUIC are going to be encrypted QUIC packets. This means you are copying, potentially from multiple places, into a staging buffer anyway (and encrypting in the process). The only use for iovec here is maybe to concatenate the QUIC packet header and the encrypted packet body, but it is easier just to have our code which generates encrypted QUIC packets leave room for the QUIC packet header in the staging buffer containing the encrypted data and fill it in there. This avoids the need for iovec support with the OS support issues that would create, while remaining maximally performant.

Options for the API surface include:

sendmmsg/recvmmsg-like API
--------------------------

```c
int BIO_readm(BIO *b, BIO_mmsghdr *msgvec,
              unsigned len, int flags, struct timespec *timeout);
int BIO_writem(BIO *b, BIO_mmsghdr *msgvec,
              unsigned len, int flags, struct timespec *timeout);
```

We can either define `BIO_mmsghdr` as a typedef of `struct mmsghdr` or redefine
an equivalent structure. The former has the advantage that we can just pass the
structures through to the syscall without copying them.

Note that in `BIO_mem_dgram` we will have to process and therefore understand
the contents of `struct mmsghdr` ourselves. Therefore, initially we define a
subset of `struct mmsghdr` as being supported, specifically no control messages;
`msg_name` and `msg_iov` only.

The flags argument is defined by us. Initially we can support something like
`MSG_DONTWAIT` (say, `BIO_DONTWAIT`).

### Implementation Questions

If we go with this, there are some issues that arise:

- Are `BIO_mmsghdr`, `BIO_msghdr` and `BIO_iovec` simple typedefs
  for OS-provided structures, or our own independent structure

>   definitions?

Reviewer: I think the lessons we can draw from 32-bit `time_t`, `timegm()` non-portability, etc. indicate that we should "own" the semantics of our public types, and having the public type defined as a typedef (even within an `#ifdef`) can cause problems in the future.  But we should feel free to have our structure layout match the OS one such that a compiler could optimize the "copy the contents" operation away.

Author: Yes, agreed; note that these questions have already been largely answered. See #18270, which includes manpages, as well as #18238.

      per message. So what limit should we give to *v*, the number of iovecs? We
      will need a fixed stack allocation of OS iovec structures and we can
      allocate from this stack allocation as we iterate through the `BIO_msghdr`
      we have been given. So in practice we could just only send messages
      until we reach our iovec limit, and then return.

      For example, suppose we allocate 64 iovecs internally:

      ```c
      struct iovec vecs[64];
      ```

      If the first message passed to a call to `BIO_writem` has 64 iovecs
      attached to it, no further messages can be sent and `BIO_writem`
      returns 1.

      If three messages are sent, with 32, 32, and 1 iovecs respectively,
      the first two messages are sent and `BIO_writem` returns 2.

      So the only important thing we would need to document in this API
      is the limit of iovecs on a single message; in other words, the
      number of iovecs which must not be exceeded if a forward progress
      guarantee is to be made. e.g. if we allocate 64 iovecs internally,
      `BIO_writem` with a single message with 65 iovecs will never work

>       and this becomes part of the API contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      and the number of iovecs in a single message that can succeed becomes part of the API contract.
```

      Obviously these quantities of iovecs are unrealistically large.
      iovecs are small, so we can afford to set the limit high enough
      that it shouldn't cause any problems in practice. We can increase
      the limit later without a breaking API change, but we cannot decrease
      it later. So we might want to start with something small, like 8.

- We also need to decide what to do for OSes which don't support at least
  `sendmsg`/`recvmsg`.

  - Don't provide these functions and require all users of these functions to
    have an alternate code path which doesn't rely on them?

    - Not providing these functions on OSes that don't support
      at least sendmsg/recvmsg is a simple solution but adds
      complexity to code using BIO_dgram. (Though it does communicate
      to code more realistic performance expectations since it

>       knows when these functions are actually available.)

Reviewer: It feels unappealing to have a "not provide a function on some OSes" API, though sometimes it is unavoidable.  (E.g., we have a separate configure option for `ec_nistp_64_gcc_128` since the `int128_t` type is not available everywhere.  I thought there was also something socket- or stdio-related that was unavailable on Windows but am not finding it now.)  I would tend to favor the ability to write portable code over some "purity" argument that says an mmsg function needs to be faster than repeatedly calling the regular send/recvmsg functions.

  - Provide these functions and emulate the functionality:

    - However there is a question here as to how we implement
      the iovec arguments on platforms without `sendmsg`/`recvmsg`. (We cannot
      use `writev`/`readv` because we need peer address information.) Logically
      implementing these would then have to be done by copying buffers around
      internally before calling `sendto`/`recvfrom`, defeating the point of
      iovecs and providing a performance profile which is surprising to code

>       using BIO_dgram.

Reviewer: In other analogous situations I've just done the internal copy and taken the performance hit.  We are open-source, so people on such systems experiencing performance issues can profile our code and potentially offer alternative approaches if needed.

>     - Another option could be a variable limit on the number of iovecs,

Reviewer: This option seems really complicated and hard to use.  I don't think the subsequent discussion provides a compelling argument that it is a path worth taking (which does not preclude other compelling arguments being made for it later).

      pitfall of buffer copying to emulate iovec support. There is a fair risk
      of code being written which accidentially works on one platform but not
      another, because the author didn't realise the iovec limit is 1 on some
      platforms. Possibly we could have an “iovec limit” variable in the
      BIO_dgram which is 1 by default, which can be increased by a call to a
      function BIO_set_iovec_limit, but not beyond the fixed size discussed
      above. It would return failure if not possible and this would give client
      code a clear way to determine if its expectations are met.

Alternate API
-------------

Could we use a simplified API? For example, could we have an API that returns
one datagram where BIO_dgram uses `readmmsg` internally and queues the returned
datagrams, thereby still avoiding extra syscalls but offering a simple API.

The problem here is we want to support “single-copy” (where the data is only
copied as it is decrypted). Thus BIO_dgram needs to know the final resting place
of encrypted data at the time it makes the `readmmsg` call.

One option would be to allow the user to set a callback on BIO_dgram it can use

> to request a new buffer, then have an API which returns the buffer:

Reviewer: This seems like it will interact poorly with applications that really want to use iovecs (so as to read part of the message into a separate header buffer, etc.).  Even letting them allocate their own contiguous buffers still doesn't support that use case.
(It's a clever idea regardless, but I'm not sure it's the best long-term choice.)

`BIO_set_dgram_(origin|dest)` should be called immediately before
`BIO_write_queue`.

This approach allows `BIO_dgram` to support myriad options via composition of
successive function calls in a “builder” style rather than via a single function
call with an excessive number of arguments or pointers to unwieldy ever-growing
argument structures, requiring constant revision of the central read/write
functions of the BIO API.

Note that since `BIO_set_dgram_(origin|dest)` sets data on outgoing packets and
`BIO_get_dgram_(origin|dest)` gets data on incoming packets, it doesn't follow
that these are accessing the same data (they are not setters and getters of a
variables called "dgram origin" and "dgram destination", even though they look
like setters and getters of the same variables from the name.) We probably want
to separate these as there is no need for a getter for outgoing packet
destination, for example, and by separating these we allow the possibility of
multithreaded use (one thread reads, one thread writes) in the future. Possibly
we should choose less confusing names for these functions. Maybe
`BIO_set_outgoing_dgram_(origin|dest)` and

> `BIO_get_incoming_dgram_(origin|dest)`.

Reviewer: +1 for using the function names to distinguish directionality (no strong opinion on the specific names)

Pros of this approach:

  - Application can generate one datagram at a time and still get the advantages
    of sendmmsg/recvmmsg (fewer syscalls, etc.)

    We probably want this for our own QUIC implementation built on top of this
    anyway. Otherwise we will need another piece to do basically the same thing

>     and agglomerate multiple datagrams into a single BIO call. Unless we only

Reviewer: Well, you're going to need to cope with the case when you're limited by congestion or flow control but still have local data buffered to send, and sendmmsg seems appropriate (within moderation) when the window  opens up by multiple datagrams' worth.

in this case.

Probably not worth supporting this. So we can have the following rule:

- After the first call to `BIO_read_dequeue` is made on a BIO_dgram, all
  subsequent calls to ordinary `BIO_read` will fail.

Of course, all of the above applies analogously to the TX side.

### BIO_dgram_mem

We will also implement from scratch a BIO_dgram_mem. This will be provided as a
BIO pair which provides identical semantics to the BIO_dgram above, both for the
legacy and zero-copy code paths.

### Thread safety

It is a functional assumption of the above design that we would never want to
have more than one thread doing TX on the same BIO and never have more than one
thread doing RX on the same BIO.

If we did ever want to do this, multiple BIOs on the same FD is one possibility
(for the BIO_dgram case at least). But I don't believe there is any general
intention to support multithreaded use of a single BIO at this time (unless I am
mistaken), so this seems like it isn't an issue.

If we wanted to support multithreaded use of the same FD using the same BIO, we
would need to revisit the set-call-then-execute-call API approach above

> (`BIO_(set|get)_dgram_(origin|dest)`) as this would pose a problem. But I mainly

Reviewer: Thanks for calling this out -- I wrote a comment above but got to delete it since you covered it already.

Author: We are not going to implement the alternative API I propose here, this was just an experiment.

  The motivations for this are:

  - It ensures portability between OSes and allows the API to be used
    on OSes which do not support `sendmmsg` or `sendmsg`.

  - It allows us to use structures in keeping with OpenSSL's existing
    abstraction layers (e.g. `BIO_ADDR` rather than `struct sockaddr`).

  - We do not have to expose functionality which we cannot guarantee
    we can support on all platforms (for example, arbitrary control messages).

  - It avoids the need to include OS headers in our own public headers,
    which would pollute the environment of applications which include
    our headers, potentially undesirably.

- For OSes which do not support `sendmmsg`, we emulate it using repeated
  calls to `sendmsg`. For OSes which do not support `sendmsg`, we emulate it
  using `sendto` to the extent feasible. This avoids the need for code consuming
  these new APIs to define a fallback code path.

- We do not define any flags at this time, as the flags previously considered
  for adoption cannot be supported on all platforms (Win32 does not have
  `MSG_DONTWAIT`).

- We ensure the extensibility of our `BIO_MSG` structure in a way that preserves

>   ABI compatibility using a `stride` argument which callers must set to

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I like this approach.

What about a call to allocate an array of BIO_MSG structures and calls to populate/retrieve their field fields?
We'd be able to keep the BIO_MSG internals opaque and avoid a previous nasty problem.  API and ABI preserved.  Having these allocated but reusable seems like a good compromise (via setter functions).

An API preserving alternative would be to make the structure public and have any change to it be an ABI break -- i.e. major releases only.

Reviewer 3: IMO we are allocating too much already. We should avoid that for this kind of low level interface.

Author: I think that would be really overkill and we don't want to force heap allocation of these structures, since they will only be needed transiently.

We will need to add stuff to this structure later e.g. for ECN, maybe ToS byte, etc. I don't think "we can never change this" is an option.

A stride argument works well and isn't an uncommon solution. They're commonly used to index rows in image buffers, and the Win32 API is full of "pass the structure size" as an extensibility mechanism. It may be relatively novel for OpenSSL but it seems like a simple and effective solution to me.

  whether a given field is part of a `BIO_MSG`. This allows us to add optional
  fields to `BIO_MSG` at a later time without breaking ABI. All new fields must
  be added to the end of the structure.

- The BIO methods are designed to support stateless operation in which they
  are simply calls to the equivalent system calls, where supported, without
  changing BIO state. In particular, this means that things like retry flags are
  not set or cleared by `BIO_sendmmsg` or `BIO_recvmmsg`.

  The motivation for this is that these functions are intended to support
  concurrent use on the same BIO. If they read or modify BIO state, they would
  need to be sychronised with a lock, undermining performance on what (for
  `BIO_dgram`) would otherwise be a straight system call.

- We do not support iovecs. The motivations for this are:

  - Not all platforms can support iovecs (e.g. Windows).

  - The only way we could emulate iovecs on platforms which don't support
    them is by copying the data to be sent into a staging buffer. This would
    defeat all of the advantages of iovecs and prevent us from meeting our

>     zero/single-copy requirements. Moreover, it would lead lead to extremely

Reviewer 4: Typo: lead lead

  functionality is not always available and to detect when this functionality is
  available in advance.

### Design

The currently proposed design is as follows:

```c
typedef struct bio_msg_st {
    void *data;
    size_t data_len;
    BIO_ADDR *peer, *local;
    uint64_t flags;
} BIO_MSG;

#define BIO_UNPACK_ERRNO(e)     /*...*/
#define BIO_IS_ERRNO(e)         /*...*/

ossl_ssize_t BIO_sendmmsg(BIO *b, BIO_MSG *msg, size_t stride,
                          size_t num_msg, uint64_t flags);
ossl_ssize_t BIO_recvmmsg(BIO *b, BIO_MSG *msg, size_t stride,
                          size_t num_msg, uint64_t flags);
```

The API is used as follows:

- `msg` points to an array of `num_msg` `BIO_MSG` structures.

- Both functions have identical prototypes, and return the number of messages
  processed in the array. If no messages were sent due to an error, `-1` is
  returned. If an OS-level socket error occurs, a negative value `v` is
  returned. The caller should determine that `v` is an OS-level socket error by
  calling `BIO_IS_ERRNO(v)` and may obtain the OS-level socket error code by
  calling `BIO_UNPACK_ERRNO(v)`.

- `stride` must be set to `sizeof(BIO_MSG)`.

> - `data` points the buffer of data to be sent or to be filled with received

Reviewer 4: points to?

  the `BIO_sendmmsg` or `BIO_recvmmsg` call. If the given message in the array
  is processed, `flags` is written with zero or more result flags at return
  time. The `flags` argument to the call itself provides for global flags
  affecting all messages in the array. Currently, no per-message or global flags
  are defined and all of these fields are set to zero on call and on return.

- `peer` and `local` are optional pointers to `BIO_ADDR` structures into
  which the remote and local addresses are to be filled. If either of these
  are NULL, the given addressing information is not requested. Local address
  support may not be available in all circumstances, in which case processing of
  the message fails. (This means that the function returns the number of
  messages processed, or -1 if the message in question is the first message.)

  Support for `local` must be explicitly enabled before use, otherwise
  attempts to use it fail.

Local address support is enabled as follows:

```c
int BIO_dgram_set_local_addr_enable(BIO *b, int enable);
int BIO_dgram_get_local_addr_enable(BIO *b);
int BIO_dgram_get_local_addr_cap(BIO *b);
```

> `BIO_dgram_get_local_addr_cap()` returns 1 if local address support is enabled.

Reviewer 4: What is the difference between `BIO_dgram_get_local_addr_enable` and `BIO_dgram_get_local_addr_cap`?

Author: Yeah, I should have said "available" here.

It is then enabled using `BIO_dgram_set_local_addr_enable()`, which fails if
support is not available.

> Options which were considered

Reviewer 4: This seems like it should be a heading

Author: It already is...

we should choose less confusing names for these functions. Maybe
`BIO_set_outgoing_dgram_(origin|dest)` and
`BIO_get_incoming_dgram_(origin|dest)`.

Pros of this approach:

  - Application can generate one datagram at a time and still get the advantages
    of sendmmsg/recvmmsg (fewer syscalls, etc.)

    We probably want this for our own QUIC implementation built on top of this
    anyway. Otherwise we will need another piece to do basically the same thing
    and agglomerate multiple datagrams into a single BIO call. Unless we only
    want use `sendmmsg` constructively in trivial cases (e.g. where we send two
    datagrams from the same function immediately after one another... doesn't
    seem like a common use case.)

  - Flexible support for single-copy (zero-copy).

Cons of this approach:

  - Very different way of doing reads/writes might be strange to existing
    applications. *But* the primary consumer of this new API will be our own
    QUIC implementation so probably not a big deal. We can always support
    `BIO_read`/`BIO_write` as a less efficient fallback for existing third party
    users of BIO_dgram.

> ### Compatibility interop

Reviewer 4: I'm getting quite confused about the different section headings. Is this supposed to be a sub-section of the "alternate API" section?

Author: Whoops, yes.

Suppose the following sequence happens:

> 1. BIO_read (legacy call path)

Reviewer 2: I'd be inclined to ignore such intermixing.  No existing application can do it and we should be able to police it adequately.

of any internal BIO state other than maybe the last datagram source/destination
address fields), BIO_dgram can go ahead and start using the `recvmmsg` code
path. Since the RX queue will obviously be empty at this point, it is
initialised and filled using `recvmmsg`, then one datagram is popped from it.

For (3) we have a legacy `BIO_read` but we have several datagrams still in the
RX queue. In this case we do have to copy - we have no choice. However this only
happens in circumstances where a user of BIO_dgram alternates between old and
new APIs, which should be very unusual.

Subsequently for (3) we have to free the buffer using the free callback. This is
an unusual case where BIO_dgram is responsible for freeing read buffers and not
the application (the only other case being premature destruction, see below).
But since this seems a very strange API usage pattern, we may just want to fail
in this case.

Probably not worth supporting this. So we can have the following rule:

- After the first call to `BIO_read_dequeue` is made on a BIO_dgram, all
  subsequent calls to ordinary `BIO_read` will fail.

Of course, all of the above applies analogously to the TX side.

> #### BIO_dgram_mem

Reviewer 4: This section seems to be a subsection of "Compatibility interop" - which is odd. It seems applicable to the selected design.

We will also implement from scratch a BIO_dgram_mem. This will be provided as a

> BIO pair which provides identical semantics to the BIO_dgram above, both for the

Reviewer 4: This isn't quite right. BIO pair and BIO_dgram_mem are different things.

Author: Yeah, s/dgram_mem/dgram_pair/ here. I got the two confused, but I meant pair.

legacy and zero-copy code paths.

> #### Thread safety

Reviewer 4: This is also a subsection of "Compatibility interop"??

It is a functional assumption of the above design that we would never want to
have more than one thread doing TX on the same BIO and never have more than one

> thread doing RX on the same BIO.

Reviewer 4: We're referring to thread safety of the alternate API right? The selected design supports multi-threaded access IIUC.

Author: Yes, the chosen design is thread safe. This comment related to the alternate design.

      per message. So what limit should we give to *v*, the number of iovecs? We
      will need a fixed stack allocation of OS iovec structures and we can
      allocate from this stack allocation as we iterate through the `BIO_msghdr`
      we have been given. So in practice we could just only send messages
      until we reach our iovec limit, and then return.

      For example, suppose we allocate 64 iovecs internally:

      ```c
      struct iovec vecs[64];
      ```

      If the first message passed to a call to `BIO_writem` has 64 iovecs
      attached to it, no further messages can be sent and `BIO_writem`
      returns 1.

      If three messages are sent, with 32, 32, and 1 iovecs respectively,
      the first two messages are sent and `BIO_writem` returns 2.

      So the only important thing we would need to document in this API
      is the limit of iovecs on a single message; in other words, the
      number of iovecs which must not be exceeded if a forward progress
      guarantee is to be made. e.g. if we allocate 64 iovecs internally,
      `BIO_writem` with a single message with 65 iovecs will never work
      and this becomes part of the API contract.

>       Obviously these quantities of iovecs are unrealistically large.

Reviewer 2: `s/large/small/`

Reviewer 2: I could easily see more than 64 being required.  E.g. a database query that returns multiple results.  Writing each record as a separate iovec will avoid a copy/gather.  It could even be each field in each record.

Author: We're talking about UDP packets here. Anything sending over UDP is going to need to have some sort of chunking mechanism of its own to meet MTU. Nobody is going to be sending database results directly over a BIO_dgram.

The main use of iovec as I see it is for concatenating a single header buffer and the encrypted payload. Even a value of two would suffice for that application.

Reviewer: I've seen some protocols (the one I remember most was from Microsoft) that use 4-6 iovecs for some datagram-protocol messages (roughly like "cleartext header, main payload, auxiliary payload, cryptographic tag"), but that basically is reinforcing Hugo's point.
